Odds ratio we hear about quite a lot when it comes to sports whether it's betting on horses or on soccer
matches or even gambling and I bet you've heard phrases like the odds are ten to one or the odds of
75 or the odds are three to two in favor of this and that and et cetera et cetera et cetera.
And today we will talk about odds.
We will try to understand what exactly ords is but more importantly we need to understand how is probability
linked to odds because we will be working with these terms quite a lot in the coming tutorials in this
section.
Here are the odds for the Melbourne Cup the Melbourne Cup is a horse race which runs in Australia in
November every year.
And and what we're looking at here are the dollar.
And I'll just like to say here right away that I'm not advocating gambling or anything.
This is just a great example for us to do our calculations off and nothing more than that here.
We've got dollar odds and as you can see they're increasing for these 10 horses as you go down the list
.
So what do they mean.
Well basically it's telling you how much money you will get if that specific horse wins.
So as you can see the horse at the top will bring you the least money because it is deemed to be the
most favorable horse the most likely to win the race the horse to the bottom will give you the most
money because it is deemed to be the least feral horse out of these 10.
Now we want to move onto a different type of odds.
We want to talk about losing to winning odds rather than dollars.
So how do we convert dollars into losing to winning.
Well first of all you have to split the dollars into two parts here.
What's the dollar odds of telling you is that if you put $1 on this horse which is called Fame game
the first one in the list then if that horse comes first you will get back $11.
However those 11 dollars already include your $1.
So basically you're going to win only $10.
So let's just quickly recap on that if the horse doesn't come first you won't get your $1 back you will
lose your $1 or a random person who's betting on this horse will lose their $1.
Now if the horse does come first you will win $10 and you'll get a $1 back plus $10 so in total 11.
So therefore if you do buy one by the other in the case if this is a losing horse then there's a 1 dollar
loss.
If it's a winning horses attend all win so one will add to $10 is you're losing amount divided by your
winning amount.
However the losing to winning odds are different.
They're inverse.
So basically you have to take the two amounts and flip them.
So the losing two willing odds are ten to one.
Now why is that might be a bit confusing but why is that.
Well because you're getting if if you win you're getting $10.
So obviously that must be a much less likely event than the event of losing.
Right.
Otherwise that company that is running these ads is going to go bankrupt.
So what this means is that you will get $10 if the horse wins.
However it is expected or assumed that this horse will only win one out of 11 times.
So if there's 11 races then one time out of these 11 races the horse might win will win.
That's what this company did this calculation is assuming and on the other hand you are losing $1 you're
losing a tiny amount.
But why is that.
Well because the horse will probably lose 10 out of 11 races and that's how the losing to winning odds
work.
So in this case and $11 odds actually means a losing two winning odds ten to one.
So you might hear the phrase that fame game has 10 to 1 odds meaning that it will only win one out of
11 times and therefore the amounts The repression is associated is calculated through that as well.
So now we want to get to probabilities.
How do we calculate the probability of winning.
Well it's pretty simple.
You just need to add the two numbers 10 plus one is 11 as we said like out of 11 races the horse will
probably win one time.
So you take one divide bill and gives you Serpens or nine.
So there's a 9 percent chance of this horse winning.
Now be careful in terms of terminology at the top you've got losing to winning odds and at the bottom
you've got the possibility of winning.
If you want the ability of losing then it's obviously one most guilty of winning which gives you 91
percent.
Now let's concrete all of this in by putting into a formula.
So some math.
What did we do just that.
If we assume that losing to winning odds is given by this ratio L2 w then what we did just there was
probably the winning equals w divided by W plus L.
So if we get if we take one minus probability of winning it'll give us Al.
Divided by W plus L.
Now if we divide one by the other we'll get probably a winning divide by one when his probability of
winning equals double you divided by L and if we write that then our winning to losing all is so not
losing to any loss but the winning two losing all it's double you divide by L equals probability of
winning divided by one most probability of winning.
Now if we put that old formula This is the formula get win to lose odds equals P divide about 1 minus
speak.
Now this is all we need from this tutorial.
From here you can move onto the next one.
We are going to be working with odds.
However if you want to stick around I wanted to show you something extra a graph a graph of this chart
.
Why I wanted to show it is just so that you kind of can grasp what was going on here and have like a
kind of visual understanding of all in your head.
So feel free to stick around.
I'm going to bring up the chart now.
So here is a Web site.
It's a German web site.
One of the first ones I found googled to Plaut a chart online.
And what are we going to do is we're actually going to just put this formula into here and see what
it plots for us.
This is ex-cricketers default.
That's that's not what we're after.
So let's go ahead and plot plot that so I'm going to take X in this case x is going to be instead of
p right so X divided by 1 minus X going to Plaut and blue and let's draw that.
So what you see here is the function which is which looks like that but we also know that probability
in this case x is always between 0 and 1 so you can only be in between here so let's cut it off at 0
and 1 and let's draw that.
So here is your function right.
Let's maybe change the x axis range so we'll start x axis from 0 and the y axis from 0 as well.
So let's row that again.
And so that is how your function looks as your probability is changing.
Maybe we can also change this bit also.
So x axis goes to 1.
Let's try that.
So there you go.
So here you can see that as X or operability change from 0 to 1.
Like from here to here what happens to your order is it changes from 0 to infinity it goes all the way
to infinity.
And why is this helpful.
Well this shows you that as probability increases your odds you're good odds the odds of winning.
So remember there's two types of odds losing to winning and winning two losing all and the ones we're
talking about here are winning two losing all and those are the ones we are going to be talking throughout
the rest of the trials in the section the winning to losing all odds are increasing.
And that's important because we'll be relying on this information further down that as probability grows
.
Winning two losing odds or the odds ratio is growing as well.
If probability is decreasing the ratio is decreasing as well.
You can already tell that from the fourth formula right away.
But at the same time having this chart visually present in your mind will allow you kind of to remember
this and always be confident in what you're doing and what we're talking about with the odds ratio.
So that's how the odds ratio works.
And we will definitely talk about it more in next tour.
We'll take it where we take it to the next level and I'll look for it.
See you then.
Until next time happy analyzing